Metric-by-metric: what each one teaches you
Loss

You are using:

criterion = nn.SmoothL1Loss()

SmoothL1 is a regression loss. It is useful for optimization, but I would not use it as your main scientific interpretation metric.

A low loss just means the model’s continuous predictions are not numerically exploding. Since your target values are small, around 0.05–0.25 mg/cm², the loss will naturally look small.

So:

Val Loss = good for training/checkpointing
MAE/RMSE/R²/Pearson/baseline = better for interpretation
MAE: Mean Absolute Error

MAE means:

On average, how far is the prediction from the true value?

Example:

GT:   0.18
Pred: 0.12
Error = |0.18 - 0.12| = 0.06 mg/cm²

Your CV summary:

Val MAE: 0.0594 ± 0.0115

means:

Across folds, the model is off by about 0.059 mg/cm² on average.

That is not dead-on because your target range is fairly small. If many values are between roughly 0.06–0.24, an error of 0.059 is substantial.

MAE is easy to explain in a report:

The model’s average absolute error was 0.059 mg/cm².

That is probably your most intuitive regression metric.

RMSE: Root Mean Squared Error

RMSE is also an error metric, but it punishes large mistakes more than MAE.

Example:

Errors: 0.02, 0.03, 0.20

MAE notices the average error.

RMSE screams:

“That 0.20 error is really bad.”

Your CV summary:

Val RMSE: 0.0747 ± 0.0189

Since RMSE is higher than MAE, that means:

Some predictions are much worse than the typical prediction.

That matches your plots. You have several dots very far from the diagonal, especially high-ground-truth leaves predicted too low, or low-ground-truth leaves predicted too high.

Use this interpretation:

MAE tells typical error.
RMSE tells whether there are painful outliers.

Here, RMSE being noticeably larger than MAE means the model has outlier mistakes.

R²: “Am I better than predicting the mean?”

R² is not just another error metric. It asks a deeper question:

Does the model explain variance in the true values?

The baseline for R² is a horizontal line:

always predict the mean target value

Interpretation:

R² = 1.0   perfect
R² = 0.0   same as mean predictor
R² < 0.0   worse than mean predictor

Your summary:

Val R²: -0.7629 ± 0.4653

That means:

On average, the model is worse than simply predicting a constant mean value.

This is the biggest warning sign in the results.

But there is nuance: with only 9 validation points per fold, R² is unstable. One or two bad points can make it very negative. So I would not say “the model is useless.” I would say:

The model is not yet reliably explaining the continuous residue variance.

That is a precise, defensible interpretation.

Target mean and predicted mean

These answer:

Is the model centered correctly?

Example from Fold 1 best-ish epoch:

Target mean: 0.1156
Pred mean:   0.1126

That is quite close. It means the model’s average prediction is not wildly biased high or low in that fold.

But Fold 2 has a problem:

Target mean: 0.1305
Pred mean:   0.0769

at its best checkpoint. That means the model is systematically underpredicting that fold.

So mean tells you bias:

Pred mean too low  = systematic underprediction
Pred mean too high = systematic overprediction
Target std and predicted std

These answer:

Is the model producing enough spread?

If the model collapses to the mean, you would see:

Target std: 0.055
Pred std:   0.005

That would mean every prediction is almost the same.

But your model does not fully collapse. Often prediction std is nontrivial. For example, Fold 1 best epoch had:

Target std: 0.0551
Pred std:   0.0642

That means the model is producing varied predictions.

However, having the right spread does not mean the predictions are assigned to the correct images.

Example:

True values:      low, medium, high
Predicted values: high, medium, low

The prediction std could look fine, but the ordering is wrong.

So std tells you:

Does the model produce a range of values?

but not:

Are those values matched to the right leaves?
Pearson r: ranking / linear relationship

Pearson correlation asks:

When ground truth increases, do predictions tend to increase too?

Interpretation:

r ≈ 1.0   strong positive relationship
r ≈ 0.0   no linear relationship
r < 0.0   inverse relationship

Your summary:

Val Pearson r: 0.1707 ± 0.4265

That is weak and very unstable.

But the fold differences are informative:

Fold 3 best epoch:

Pearson r: 0.7150

That is encouraging. It means in Fold 3, the model had a meaningful positive ranking relationship: higher ground-truth leaves tended to get higher predictions.

Fold 2, by contrast, has near-zero or negative Pearson values at many epochs, meaning the model is not ranking leaves correctly.

So Pearson r tells you:

Is the model learning the direction/ranking of residue?

R² tells you:

Is the model numerically accurate enough to beat a mean predictor?

That distinction matters a lot.

A model can have decent Pearson r but bad R² if it gets the ordering somewhat right but is poorly calibrated.

Baseline MAE: the “dumb model” comparison

Baseline MAE asks:

What if I ignored the image and predicted one constant value for every validation sample?

This is crucial.

Your summary:

Model Val MAE: 0.0594 ± 0.0115
Baseline MAE:  0.0451 ± 0.0046

That means the simple baseline is currently better than your CNN.

This is probably the most important practical result.

Even though the model outputs interesting-looking values, its average absolute error is worse than a constant predictor. That means the model has not yet earned the claim:

“Image features improve residue prediction.”

Instead, the current claim is:

“The model can produce varied predictions and sometimes captures ranking structure, but it does not yet outperform a mean-value baseline.”

One important note: in your earlier code, your baseline used the validation mean:

baseline_pred = np.full_like(all_targets_np, np.mean(all_targets_np))

That is an optimistic “oracle” baseline because it uses validation-set information. For a fairer baseline, use the training mean:

train_mean = np.mean(train_targets_np)
baseline_pred = np.full_like(all_targets_np, train_mean)

But even if the fair training-mean baseline is slightly worse, this comparison is still the right next thing to track.